# C语言学习笔记：入门篇

## 参考材料

中国大学MOOC：程序设计入门——C语言（教师：翁恺）

中国大学MOOC：C语言程序设计进阶（教师：翁恺）

C Programming Language 2nd edition



## 0：初识C语言

### 0.0 程序框架

```c
#include <stdio.h> % tells the compiler to include information about the standard input/output library

int main() % The parentheses after the function name surround the argument list. In this example, main is defined to be a function that expects no arguments, which is indicated by the empty list 
{	
	return 0;
}
```



### 0.1 预处理器

#### 0.1.0 File Inclusion

```c
 #include "filename"
 #include <filename> 
```


#### 0.1.1 Macro Substitution

A definition has the form 
```c
#define name replacement text 
```
Any name may be defined with any replacement text. For example:
```c
 #define  forever  for (;;)    /* infinite loop */ 
```



It is also possible to define macros with arguments, so the replacement text can be different for different calls of the macro. As an example, define a macro called max: 

```c
 #define  max(A, B)  ((A) > (B) ? (A) : (B))
```
Thus the line 
```c
 x = max(p+q, r+s); 
```
will be replaced by the line 
```c
 x = ((p+q) > (r+s) ? (p+q) : (r+s)); 
```



The expressions are evaluated twice; this is bad if they involve side effects like increment operators or input and output. For instance 

```c
 max(i++, j++)  /* WRONG */ 
```
will increment the larger twice.



Some care also has to be taken with parentheses to make sure the order of evaluation is preserved; consider what happens when the macro 

```c
#define square(x)  x * x  /* WRONG */ 
```
is invoked as  square(z+1). 



Names may be undefined with #undef, usually to ensure that a routine is really a function, not a macro: 

```c
#undef getchar
int getchar(void) { ... }
```



Formal parameters are not replaced within quoted strings. If, however, a parameter name is preceded by a # in the replacement text, the combination will be expanded into a quoted string with the parameter replaced by the actual argument. This can be combined with string concatenation to make, for example, a debugging print macro: 

```c
#define  dprint(expr)   printf(#expr " = %g\n", expr) 
```
When this is invoked, as in 
```c
dprint(x/y) 
```
the macro is expanded into 
```c
 printf("x/y" " = &g\n", x/y); 
```
and the strings are concatenated, so the effect is 
```c
 printf("x/y = &g\n", x/y); 
```
Within the actual argument, each " is replaced by \" and each \ by \\, so the result is a legal string constant.



The preprocessor operator ## provides a way to concatenate actual arguments during macro expansion. If a parameter in the replacement text is adjacent to a ##, the parameter is replaced by the actual argument, the ## and surrounding white space are removed, and the result is rescanned. For example, the macro paste concatenates its two arguments: 

```c
 #define  paste(front, back)  front ## back 
```
so paste(name, 1) creates the token name1. 



#### 0.1.2 Conditional Inclusion

The #if line evaluates a constant integer expression (which may not include sizeof, casts, or enum constants). If the expression is non-zero, subsequent lines until an #endif or #elif or #else are included. (The preprocessor statement #elif is like else-if.) The expression defined(name) in a #if is 1 if the name has been defined, and 0 otherwise. 
For example, to make sure that the contents of a file hdr.h are included only once, the contents of the file are surrounded with a conditional like this: 

```c
#if !defined(HDR)
# define HDR

/* contents of hdr.g go here */

#endif
```

The first inclusion of hdr.h defines the name HDR; subsequent inclusions will find the name defined and skip down to the #endif. A similar style can be used to avoid including files multiple times. If this style is used consistently, then each header can itself include any other headers on which it depends, without the user of the header having to deal with the interdependence. 
This sequence tests the name SYSTEM to decide which version of a header to include: 

```c
#if SYSTEM == SYSV
	#define HDR "sysv.h"
#elif SYSTEM == BSD
    #define HDR "bsd.h"
#elif SYSTEM == MSDOS
	#define HDR "msdos.h"
#else
	#define HDR "default.h"
#endif
#include HDR
```

The #ifdef and #ifndef lines are specialized forms that test whether a name is defined. The first example of #if above could have been written:

```c
#ifndef HDR
#define HDR

/* contents of hdr.h go here */

#endif
```



### 0.2 常量与变量

#### 0.2.0 数字常量（省略）

#### 0.2.1 字符常量（省略）

#### 0.2.2 枚举常量

The first name in an enum has value 0, the next 1, and so on, unless explicit values are specified. If not all values are specified, unspecified values continue the progression from the last specified value, as the second of these examples: 

```c
enum escapes { BELL = '\a', BACKSPACE = '\b', TAB = '\t', NEWLINE = '\n', VTAB = '\v', RETURN = '\r' };

enum months {JAN = 1, FEB, MAR, APR, MAY, JUN, JUL, AUG, SEP, OCT, NOV, DEC };
/* FEB = 2, MAR = 3, etc. */
```

Names in different enumerations must be distinct. Values need not be distinct in the same enumeration. 



#### 0.2.3 变量类型

char, int float, double, ...etc.

In addition, there are a number of qualifiers that can be applied to these basic types. **short** and **long** apply to integers:
```c
short int sh;
long int counter;
```

The qualifier **signed** or **unsigned** may be applied to char or any integer. unsigned numbers are always positive or zero,

If an arithmetic operator has integer operands, an integer operation is performed. If an arithmetic operator has one floating-point operand and one integer operand, however, the integer will be converted to floating point before the operation is done. Writing floating-point constants with explicit decimal points.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main()
{
	printf("10 / 3 = %f",10/3.0);

	return 0;
}
//Output:3.333333
```



#### 0.2.4 变量类型转换

In general, the only automatic conversions are those that convert a **narrower** operand into a **wider** one without losing information.

A char is just a small integer, so chars may be freely used in arithmetic expressions. 

```c
/* atoi: convert s to integer */
int atoi (char s[])
{
    int i, n;
    n = 0;
    for (i = 0; s[i] >= '0' && s[i] <= '9'; ++i)
        n = 10 * n + (s[i] - '0');
    return n;
}
```



Another example of char to int conversion is the function lower:

```c
/* lower: convert c to lower case; ASCII only */
int lower(int c)
{
    if (c >= 'A' && c<= 'Z')
        return c + 'a' - 'A'
    else
        return c;
}
```

The standard header <ctype.h> defines a family of functions that provide tests and conversions that are independent of character set. For example, the function **tolower** is a portable replacement for the function **lower** shown above. Similarly, the test 
```c
 c >= '0'  && c <= '9';
```
 can be replaced by
```c
 isdigit(c);
```



There is one subtle point about the conversion of characters to integers. The language does not specify whether variables of type char are signed or unsigned quantities. When a char is converted to an int, can it ever produce a negative integer? The answer varies from machine to machine, reflecting differences in architecture. On some machines a char whose leftmost bit is 1 will be converted to a negative integer. On others, a char is promoted to an int by adding zeros at the left end, and thus is always positive.



Finally, explicit type conversions can be forced in any expression, with a unary operator called a cast. In the construction 
*(type name) expression*

If arguments are declared by a function prototype, as the normally should be, the declaration causes automatic coercion of any arguments when the function is called. Thus, given a function prototype for sqrt: 
```c
double sqrt(double)
```
then call
```c
root2 = sqrt(2)
```
oerces the integer 2 into the double value 2.0 without any need for a cast. 



#### 0.2.5 静态变量（特殊全局变量）

全局变量初始值为0，指针为NULL。如果函数内部有与全局变量同名的本地变量，全局变量会被隐藏。

Static storage is specified by prefixing the normal declaration with the word **static**. If the two routines and the two variables are compiled in one file, as in

```c
static char buf[BUFSIZE]; /* buffer for ungetch */
static int bufp = 0; /* next free position in buf */

int getch(void) {...}

void ungetch(int c) {...}
```

then no other routine will be able to access buf and bufp, and those names will not conflict with the same names in other files of the same program. 

The **external static** declaration is most often used for variables, but it can be applied to functions as well. Normally, function names are global, visible to any part of the entire program. If a function is declared static, however, its name is invisible outside of the file in which it is declared. 

The static declaration can also be applied to internal variables. Internal static variables are local to a particular function just as automatic variables are, but unlike automatics, they remain in existence rather than coming and going each time the function is activated. This means that internal static variables provide private, permanent storage within a single function. 



#### 0.2.6 寄存器变量

A register declaration advises the compiler that the variable in question will be heavily used. The idea is that register variables are to be placed in machine registers, which may result in smaller and faster programs. 
The register declaration looks like 

```c
register int x;
register char c;

f(register unsigned m, register long n)
{
    register int i;
    ...
}
```

In practice, there are restrictions on register variables, reflecting the realities of underlying hardware. Only a few variables in each function may be kept in registers, and only certain types are allowed. Excess register declarations are harmless, however, since the word register is ignored for excess or disallowed declarations. And it is not possible to take the address of a register variable,  regardless of whether the variable is actually placed in a register. 



#### 0.2.7 变量的初始化

In the absence of explicit initialization, external and static variables are guaranteed to be initialized to zero; automatic and register variables have undefined (i.e., garbage) initial values.

For external and static variables, the initializer must be a constant expression; the initialization is done once, conceptionally before the program begins execution. For automatic and register variables, the initializer is not restricted to being a constant: it may be any expression involving previously defined values, even function calls.

An array may be initialized by following its declaration with a list of initializers enclosed in braces and separated by commas. For example, to initialize an array days with the number of days in each month: 
```c
 int days[] = { 31, 28, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31 }
```
If there are fewer initializers for an array than the specified size, the others will be zero for external, static and automatic variables.

Character arrays are a special case of initialization; a string may be used instead of the braces and commas notation: 
```c
 char pattern = "ould"; 
```
is a shorthand for the longer but equivalent 
```c
char pattern[] = { 'o', 'u', 'l', 'd', '\0' }; 
```
In this case, the array size is five (four characters plus the terminating '\0)



### 0.3 输入输出字符

#### 0.3.0 getchar/putchar

Each time it is called, **getchar** reads the next input character from a text stream and returns that as its value. That is, after 
```c
c = getchar(); 
```
the variable c contains the next character of input. 



The function **putchar** prints a character each time it is called: 
```c
putcahr(c);
```
prints the contents of the integer variable c as a character, usually on the screen.

```c
/* 示例：getchar一次只能读取一个字符 */
#include <stdio.h>

int main ()
{
   char c;
 
   printf("请输入字符：");
   c = getchar();
 
   printf("输入的字符：");
   putchar(c);
  
   return(0);
}
```



#### 0.3.1 File Copying

```c
#include <stdio.h>

/* copy input to output; 1st version */

main()
{
    int c;
    
    c = getchar();
    while (c !=EOF) {
        putchar(c);
        c = getchar();
    }
}
```

The type **char** is specifically meant for storing such character data, but any integer type can be used. We used **int** for a subtle but important reason.  

The problem is distinguishing the end of input from valid data. The solution is that **getchar** returns a distinctive value when there is no more input, a value that cannot be confused with any real character. This value is called **EOF**, for "end of file''. We must declare **c** to be a type big enough to hold any value that **getchar** returns. We can't use char since **c** must be big enough to hold **EOF** in addition to any possible char. Therefore we use int.

**EOF** is an integer defined in <stdio.h>, but the specific numeric value doesn't matter as long as it is not the same as any char value. By using the symbolic constant, we are assured that nothing in the program depends on the specific numeric value. 



#### 0.3.2 Character Counting

```c
#include <stdio.h>

/* count characters in input; */

main()
{
    double nc;
    
    for (nc = 0; getchar() != EOF; ++nc)
        ; //The body of this **for** loop is empty, because all the work is done in the test and increment parts. But the grammatical rules of C require that a for statement have a body. The isolated semicolon, called a null statement, is there to satisfy that requirement. 
    printf("%.0f\n", nc);
}
```



#### 0.3.3 Line Counting

```c
#include <stdio.h>

/* count lines in input */
main()
{
    int c, nl;
    
    nl = 0;
    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
        if (c == '\n')
            ++nl;
    printf("%d\n", nl);
}
```



#### 0.3.4 Word Counting

```c
#include <stdio.h>

#define IN 1 /* inside a word */
#define OUT 0 /* outside a word */

/* count lines, words, and characters in input */

main()
{
    int c, nl, nw, nc, state;
    
    state = OUT;
    nl = nw = nc = 0;
    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF) {
        ++nc;
        if (c == '\n')
            ++nl;
        if (c == ' ' || c == '\n' || c = '\t')
            state = OUT;
        else if (state == OUT) {
            state = IN;
            ++nw;
        }
    }
    printf("%d %d %d\n", nl, nw, nc);
}
```

